---
layout: post
title:  "An Overview of Neutral"
date:   2018-12-15 12:00:00 -0400
image: "https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/1600/1*hGwZtVI1L6MMbRTXsz5l8g.png"
categories: posts
---

# An Overview of Neutral

![](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/1600/1*hGwZtVI1L6MMbRTXsz5l8g.png)

**Introduction**

Following the economic collapse of 2008, there were calls for increased
transparency in the financial markets and ways to transact without relying on a
third party custodian for your assets. Enter: cryptocurrencies. But with all the
growth in this sector a new set of challenges has arisen, particularly around
how to bring together fragmented pools of liquidity that are distributed across
thousands of token exchanges and digital networks.

Neutral is a new smart contract system designed to solve several of these key
issues. It’s a piece of software sitting on a digital ledger that allows for the
creation of aggregate digital currency instruments. This software-based approach
to the creation and management of crypto baskets drives price discovery on the
network itself without relying on “trusted” third-party sources of information.
By reducing reliance on these, it allows pricing to become more transparent. The
result of these processes allow for users to benefit from an aggregate financial
instrument for transactional purposes that is decentralized in nature.

The core team is comprised of experienced investors, quantitative traders,
trading system developers and is advised by Nobel Prize economists and financial
industry experts. Sequoia led the recent round of equity investment together
with FBG Capital and Bixin.

**On Exchange-Traded-Funds (ETFs)**

The Neutral Project aims to usher a new wave of financial instruments, a series
of flagship offerings that functionally exhibit properties like an ETF, but
utilize blockchain technology to gain exposures to crypto assets in a more
efficient and transparent manner.

An ETF — or an exchange traded fund — is simply that. ETFs can be purchased on a
variety of exchanges globally, representing an aggregate basket of assets.
Traditional ETFs continue to be the fastest growing product to obtain market
share, with more than $5 trillion in assets today. The popularity of these
instruments gained traction after the US recession, with good reason. ETFs offer
a more simplistic structure from the standpoint of the end-consumer in the
secondary market — the upfront cost is a management fee and cash flow payments
from the underlying assets are typically reinvested. The fund structure also
provides transparency into holdings and are significantly more tax efficient
than mutual funds, through an elegant system that is the creation/redemption
process. Because ETFs are so diverse they are also a core component into the
creation of portfolios, especially seen in a top-down investment management
perspective and have inspired the creation of many other exchange-traded
products. The success of ETFs has been met with strong empirical evidence,
offering many benefits for end consumers ranging from tactical investment bets
to efficient sector allocations. Increased trading activity on secondary
exchanges allow ETFs to be more liquid and price efficient than its underlying
constituents, enabling investors easily take on exposures to broader markets.

A simple analogy of how an aggregate product can increase trading volume and
liquidity is in relation to how Amazon aggregates a market. For example, the
shoe market is quite fragmented, and not easy for a consumer to purchase shoes.
Different sellers may even offer the same shoe, but often varying prices. Often
times in retail, we see mom-and-pop shops finding it difficult to get visibility
and an overall disconnect when it comes to connecting buyers and sellers.
Customer experience becomes elevated due to the increased ease of finding,
comparing, and purchasing the end product when aggregation comes into play. With
a platform facilitating this exchange, shops get better visibility to drive more
volume and individuals like you or me have more purchasing power. The result is
an ecosystem that is mutually beneficial to both buyers and suppliers of a
product.

**Smart Contracts**

Neutral is modelled as a smart contract system. Smart contracts are a class of
software that live on networks (such as Ethereum) and are executed and validated
autonomously by a collection of computers that make up the network. Cryptography
secures and surrounds these systems, and gives us a mathematical basis to verify
their integrity. This allows their code to execute based on a set of inputs and
produce a set outputs without relying on a centralized party. This is important
because the code itself, its input, and its output can be validated by many
parties who are unable to alter it to their benefit. Given the open nature of
these systems, it is possible to audit and monitor the entire program and its
connected components. In the context of the Neutral ecosystem this gives users,
auditors, and regulators deep insight into its construction and operation. Many
are able to verify the integrity of the entire process. Ultimately, once a
Neutral token is deployed on these smart contract networks it will function
completely autonomously. The math and algorithms that govern its operation will
operate independently of a centralized entity, and provide continuous services
to both users and other software on the network.

**Construction**

The Neutral Project has the explicit goal of creating lower volatility aggregate
instruments — that is, a basket of digital currencies or digital tokens that
together form a new token which is representative of the basket. In this context
a token is a transferable sub-unit of account on a digital ledger. The intent is
to lower consumer risk through diversification, and to create a completely
trustless and transparent mechanism accomplishing this.

**Components**

Avoiding adverse manipulation by third parties is an important starting point
for building a trustless system. The initial collection of components in a
Neutral basket are ERC20 compatible tokens on the Ethereum network. The initial
selection will be done through a rigorous and transparent process where we
assess the relative quality of these tokens. Several important considerations
include, security, code quality, liquidity profile, and token ownership
distribution. Ultimately, a Neutral token will transition to a more thorough
decentralized governance structure which will allow stakeholders in the
instrument to determine its composition.

**Creation**

The Neutral token will be created through the collateralization of its
components. The collateralization process establishes market prices for all of
the components in relation to the Neutral token. This market price is used when
calculating future redemption or creation pricing. The quantity of Neutral
generated per collateralization is large enough to disincentive small players
from collateralizing. Only participants who have significant economic capability
will be able to engage in this process.

**Redemption**

Just as the Neutral is created by participants, it can be deconstructed by
holders. An entity that controls a Neutral token can also redeem it. This would
destroy the Neutral token and replace it with the underlying collateral.

**Balancing**

Balancing is an important consideration for aggregate instruments, and a Neutral
token accomplishes this algorithmically, and without third party interference
due to the natural interaction of participants in the ecosystem. The interaction
between Creation and Redemption mechanics creates an auto-balancing mechanism
whereby the underlying becomes equally weighted. Arbitrage opportunities for
participants show up between underlying components vs the aggregate Neutral
instrument as the market price fluctuates.

**Trustless Oracle**

A critical flaw in many blockchain-based financial instruments and services is
that they rely on third party sources of information (Oracles) on which to make
decisions. This means that the input into a service can be used to alter the
function of the system to the detriment of the users. The Neutral pricing
mechanism offers a real alternative that should increase the accountability of
the entire system — processes together result in pricing information being
injected into the primary market by the participants themselves. Once this
information exists on the network additional smart contract software and
services can utilize it for better and more transparent pricing.

**Conclusion**

The Neutral software is a new way to aggregate digital currencies to create
lower volatility and reduced risk tokens. Its novel design further extends the
capabilities of these networks by providing trustless pricing and swapping
mechanisms that significantly increases accountability and auditing, reducing
the chance of third party fraud through false oracular statements.

— —

To learn more about Neutral, please [visit our
website](http://www.neutralproject.com/), follow us on
[Twitter](https://twitter.com/neutral_project) or join our
[Telegram](https://t.me/neutralproject).

Want to work with us? [We’re hiring](https://angel.co/neutral-1)!
