---
layout: post
title:  "An Introduction to StableCoins"
date:   2018-12-23 12:00:00 -0400
image: "https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/2400/1*n_KS7xCga1yTo3aDfiK82g.png"
categories: posts
---

# An Introduction to StableCoins

![](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/2400/1*n_KS7xCga1yTo3aDfiK82g.png)

The cryptocurrency space has seen a huge expansion of stablecoins in the past
year. Almost 40 different projects are currently live and many more are being
created. $330 million of funding has been raised for projects in the space and
stablecoins currently represent over $3 billion in market capitalization as of
December 2018. While this is roughly only 2% of the total crypto market cap,
stablecoins represent 26% of the daily trading activity. These types of tokens
demonstrate more than just a minor use case for blockchain technology, but have
utility that is expected to grow exponentially as the crypto ecosystem matures.
Although there is enough room in the market to support many stablecoin projects,
there is an arms race is taking place. Which business model is the strongest and
can weather the volatile nature of the crypto market? Only time will tell.

**What is a Stablecoin? Why Should You Care?**

The first wave of live stablecoins was launched back in 2014. Though the idea of
a stablecoin is not new, many different models have been coming out to offer the
same value proposition. Its purpose is simply to maintain price stability in
reference to another value — in many cases the US Dollar. As many of us probably
know, price volatility cuts both ways — up and down, good and bad. Many people
see crypto as an extremely volatile asset class, which makes it very difficult
to assess the actual value of any protocol. Stablecoins attempt to combat this
problem and provide a blockchain-native solution to preserve value in crypto for
various purposes and use cases.

For a consumer, stablecoins represent the bridge between traditional
transaction-based methods to an emerging technology while still maintaining a
consistent, pegged value. In this context, it’s easy to recognize why has there
been so much attention and fundraising for these stablecoins. The adoption of
blockchain technology is already happening, with stablecoins providing the most
relevant use cases to disrupt lending, payments, remittance, and financial
services in a more transparent, efficient, and ease-of-use manner.

**What Makes Stablecoins ‘Stable’?**

There are many different ways a token can maintain its currency peg properly,
and below is a broad highlight of the many stablecoin models out there.

![](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/1600/0*GciYiVbnR-cP1f2J)

From Blockchain’s *[State of Stablecoins](https://www.blockchain.com/research)*
Report

* **The traditional (fiat-backed) stablecoin:** A token is issued for every
associated real dollar value that is collateralized against it. Some notable
coins that utilize this model are [TrueUSD](https://www.trusttoken.com/trueusd/)
and USD Coin.
* **Crypto-collateralized stablecoins**: These issue tokens from a source that is
natively backed by the value of another cryptocurrency. Examples of
crypto-collateralized stablecoins are [Dai](https://makerdao.com/), part of the
MakerDAO system, and BitUSD.
* **Algorithmic (or elastic) stablecoins**: These coins have no collateral backing
the currency, but instead use a variety of actions to control supply and
maintain the reference peg. There hasn’t been a live algorithmic stablecoin that
has successfully maintained its value in the markets, though large amounts of
funding have gone into investigating this concept into projects like
[Carbon](https://www.carbon.money/) and
[Ampleforth](https://www.ampleforth.org/). Presently, these projects face a
sleuth of regulatory and legal uncertainties.

Many stablecoins do deviate *slightly* from their reference peg in terms of
price, but this is as a result of actions from real-world activity such as
transfer fees, trading activities, and counterparty risk. Since rational
arbitrageurs are willing to trade into the perceived value of the stablecoin,
removing discrepancies based on market conditions, this is viewed as temporary.

**What Can Stablecoins Do?**

Store of value and medium of exchange is the most common utility associated with
stablecoins. They are also a prime use case for a variety of dApps to offer
growing crypto-lending and remittance services. Almost 30 million USD of
[lending activity was
seen](https://medium.com/bloqboard/decentralized-finance-november-2018-lending-activity-9f1dae23b6c)
in protocols in November 2018 alone.

Many popular stablecoins are ERC20 (a rule set for tokens on the Ethereum
blockchain), so programmability as well as community support help the
development of a stablecoin ecosystem. Because of such digitization, transfers
of value can and generally are more transparent, quickly verifiable, efficient,
and secure to move around.

**What’s Next for Stablecoins**

There are various dimensions that a stablecoin can be evaluated on, and we can
observe the confidence people have associated with specific stablecoins by the
market activity in terms of the price. Every stablecoin and their model has
varying levels of transparency, whether it be on the process (on-chain
collateralization, smart-contract issuance) or to inspect the collateral backing
the crypto. The actual stability of a stablecoin and its scalability have also
been debated upon on the best token model, with the more decentralized and
scalable the more likely a stablecoin tending to be more volatile and lose its
peg. Compliance has been a hot topic in conjunction with redeemability of a
stablecoin into fiat. Security is also of importance for a stablecoin to
properly preserve its value. Lastly, possible inclusion of pricing oracles,
pooled collateral, or interest yield in the design itself may influence public
opinion about how credit-worthy and beneficial a stablecoin can be.

Empirically, **fiat-backed stablecoins** are valued at a premium and observe
less price volatility than **crypto-collateralized** stablecoins. People trust
the concept that they should be able to redeem and maintain consistent value
between the tokenized and fiat world. Progressions for easier redeemability can
be refined over time, and the centralized controls (along with KYC/AML) are
presently viewed as a positive when it comes the acceptance of regulation and
attestation of fiat-backed reserves. The benefits of crypto-collateralized
models are the possibility of increased scale and adoption, as well as the
avoidance of any centralized authority to stop activity or block consumer funds.
However, consumer confidence views the existing frameworks for
crypto-collateralized stablecoins as risky due to lack of price stability
against adverse market movements.

Simplicity and transparency traits are more niche offerings:
[Tether](https://tether.to/) currently dominates the majority of stablecoin
market activity but is quite opaque on its design. However, this trend could
change depending on consumer confidence on other emerging stablecoins. Many
stablecoins have not yet explored code licensing or provide accessibility to
third-party use cases, such as additional wallet support. This should expand as
the ecosystem develops to bring in more dApp activity.

Where the **algorithmic/elastic stablecoin** model is concerned, it should prove
interesting to see whether the value proposition holds in the market.

There’s no question that there is still much experimentation to be done, but it
is clear that stablecoins are popularized to create innovative monetary
standards — and there is strong belief that the market will support many
different varieties. Stablecoins are structural in the adoption of digital
currencies and have many tangible use cases. These are all reasons for investors
and spectators alike to get excited about participating in this transformative
movement. As a matter of fact we are about to enter the ring *very* soon,
referencing a different design with our own clever
[approach](https://medium.com/@neutralproject/an-overview-of-neutral-7ee2c4eb3fc7).
We gathered feedback on the best features of what makes a stablecoin great, and
we’re creating one that will be a major improvement over what is available today
with a real advantage over any possible newcomers in the future.

— —

If you’re interested in learning more about our team and products, [check out
our website](http://www.neutralproject.com/) or start a conversation with us on
[Telegram](https://t.me/neutralproject) or Twitter. If you want to get more
involved with what we’re doing, don’t hesitate to reach out.
