---
layout: post
title:  "The Need for Many Stablecoins and a Metastable Basket"
date:   2019-02-14 12:00:00 -0400
categories: jekyll update
---

# The Need for Many Stablecoins and a Metastable Basket

![](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/1600/1*dW4FS0FThh7CDyBAsBlX1g.png)

There’s no doubt that the crypto-verse, and internet as a whole, has been
buzzing about stablecoins and their role in the future of digital currency. In
fact, since 2014, over $350mm in funding has gone into backing north of 60
stablecoin-specific projects across the world.

![](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/1600/0*jggpPQec44PY27CW)
<span class="figcaption_hack">Source: [blockchain research](https://www.blockchain.com/research)</span>

Recently, an influx of projects pegged to the U.S. Dollar have been popping up
all over and it’s understandably become hard to differentiate them from each
other. After all, many have similar value propositions. With all of this in
mind, it’s perfectly reasonable for someone to wonder what the need for *yet
another* stablecoin project is. To get the answer, we can draw parallels from
use cases in fiat currencies.

As a refresher, we’ve addressed properties and qualities of an effective
stablecoin
[here](https://medium.com/@neutralproject/an-introduction-to-stablecoins-6a2a6c67d447)
(such as a medium of exchange and unit of account). This holds true in the fiat
sense as well. The derivation of currency’s usefulness comes more from its
perceived value rather than its intrinsicality. For a currency to be effective
for transactions, we need to understand what the desirable traits are; in this
case, it can be described through its utility, demand, and stability.

When we think of **utility**, it’s important to evaluate how well a currency can
be accepted by a community. Can it be used across many merchants?; Payment
channels?; Federated reserves?; Banking systems? In the context of stablecoins,
we can consider these tokens as a means to enable access to other crypto assets.
We can also extend its utility by understanding what exchanges it is listed on,
and which merchants accept this as appropriate tender.

This ties in very well with the second concept of **demand**. If there is strong
demand to accept a currency as a method of transactions because of its expansive
utilities, then it’s likely the demand for such a currency can only grow based
on this attractiveness. This is why we can expect different interest rates
across assets in the debt markets — the demand estimates the measure of utility
which can be expressed. Liquidity, price elasticity, monetary policies, and debt
activity are appropriate measures of popularity for a specific currency. Even
among similarly priced assets, the desire to have one versus another can be
distinctly different.

The last piece to consider is **stability**. We can find effective illustrations
of encouraging stability when considering one of the most traditional examples:
when a foreign country pegs their currency to another reference. When countries
conduct activities within their economy in differently denominated currencies,
they can safeguard their economic activities and prevent large imbalances in
their spending, investment, and trade from foreign exchange risk. When deciding
how to prop the value of their own capital, the first choice is the reference
the U.S. Dollar, due to its large representation and trusted worth in the world
economy. Because of how fragmented the crypto markets are, we want a means of
reference that is stable and accepted on a widespread basis. Stablecoins can
prove their efficacy and help other crypto-focused businesses grow or adopt
practices using blockchain. Otherwise businesses focused heavily on crypto can
be exposed to headwinds beyond their core control. If a stablecoin which loses
stability loses its inherent purchasing power, it incurs a loss in its perceived
value for transactions. This is when the redeemability comes into play — to
ensure the value preservation of a stablecoin can exist and be traded into
another asset of equivalent worth in a timely manner. It’s a core reason why
many stablecoin projects have been accumulating their reserves and choosing
their reference peg to be the U.S. Dollar. By doing so, a stablecoin project can
propagate an emphasis of stability that has expansive influence extending beyond
country borders.

All these principles are all interrelated, which is why we think it is important
for a stablecoin to exemplify all these traits on top of properties we’ve
mentioned in our previous articles. More stability can draw in more demand, and
with that can procure more utility. While we think Bitcoin is a good store of
value*, we don’t think it can be a standard for every means of transactions in
the form of a currency. *An inherently deflationary asset cannot maintain
stability in tandem with demand, even if there is sustained perceived value and
exceptional utility. This is why we see stablecoins as important — to serve as a
bridge into crypto from ideas seen in the traditional world. By design,
stablecoins can complement inflationary and deflationary activity unlike other
cryptocurrencies, and exist to ensure perceived value preservation to concepts
that people have historically had an easy way to interpret. Presently
stablecoins represent more than 25% of daily volume through crypto markets while
only representing 2% of the total market capitalization, while most other
cryptocurrency activity has only dampened. As a matter of fact, stablecoins are
becoming larger candidates to facilitate transactions in crypto, experiencing
especially explosive growth in 2018 and the start of 2019.

**Growing Adoption of Stablecoins by Market Capitalization and Trading
Activity**

![](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/1600/0*sTYCfSh76U5tNxE5)
<span class="figcaption_hack">Source:[ stablecoin index](https://stablecoinindex.com/) and
[coinmarketcap](https://coinmarketcap.com/charts/)</span>

Stablecoins can even be used as a quicker and more inexpensive form of
cross-border payments than fiat mediums, making them one of the best methods for
remittance — an industry that, was standardized by the U.S. dollar, but still
has its shortcomings.

![](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/1600/0*slf9ViGRufBeCpzB)
<span class="figcaption_hack">[Source](https://www.finder.com/remittance-fees-global-world); The high fees
reflect the cost of transactions from regulations, taxes, and operations.
Stablecoins have the ability to transfer funds with less friction, time, and
opacity</span>

In essence, stablecoins are one of the most tangible methods that someone can
understand and participate within the global community, impacting both fiat- and
crypto-denominated use cases. They are a core driver in understanding how
blockchain can be applied to different use cases to address overarching problems
especially in transactional businesses.

As long as any stablecoin exhibits these aforementioned properties, we view this
as complementary to building upon the crypto economy, much like how many
different currencies exist to fuel the world economy. More than that, we think a
universal stablecoin standard would not serve *all* use cases, similar to how a
universal fiat currency would not work given the nature of different global
economies. Because of this parallel, the requirement for many stablecoins to
promote a whole ecosystem becomes clearer. Yet we’re agnostic to the competition
of individual projects, which is why we enable interchangeability between
supported stablecoins at the core of driving liquidity within our product
constitution. This is how we’ve been building our token — as a [metastable
basket](https://medium.com/@neutralproject/intro-to-neutral-dollar-98f95d1ff9f4).

The need for such a concept comes from the lack of infrastructure and approach
to a nascent industry. Particularly, the roadblocks of fragmented liquidity and
difficult accessibility can be addressed through a *reserve, a service, and a
tradable asset rolled into an open-ended metastable solution*. This idea has
been floated around and
[experimented](https://medium.com/@neutralproject/a-case-study-on-husd-752b16a2d1f8),
but in practice is extremely complicated to construct properly if people’s needs
and wants are not well understood. Today, it’s very apparent that an effective
metastable design is needed for such a core part of the crypto markets to mature
and flourish.

And that’s exactly why we are building the Neutral Dollar. Our goal is to create
a metastable basket which enables users to lessen any reservations they have
with any single stablecoin, while allowing them to take advantage of any
constituent through our enabled stablecoin swap. By satisfying the need for a
metastable design, we can offer better **stability** as a stablecoin. We hope to
improve **utility **by expanding our services and partnerships in order to
increase overall **demand**. A Neutral Dollar holder not only inherits all of
the benefits of the basket itself, but can also take advantage of any underlying
token to address whatever stablecoin use case is needed. The open-ended design
allows for an *unprecedented price discovery mechanism in crypto*, providing
transparency to better understand the market-driven strengths and weaknesses of
similarly valued components that result from collective retail and institutional
activities.

By positioning the Neutral Dollar this way, we have merits and applications that
no individual stablecoin project alone can exhibit, exemplifying our desire to
promote crypto on the whole. We’re excited to bring you a solution like the one
we’re designing and hope everyone can see why the space necessitates it.

— — — —

If you’re interested in learning more about our team and products, [check out
our website](http://www.neutralproject.com/) or start a conversation with us on
[Telegram](https://t.me/neutralproject) or
[Twitter](http://www.twitter.com/neutral_project).

* [Bitcoin](https://hackernoon.com/tagged/bitcoin?source=post)
* [Cryptocurrency](https://hackernoon.com/tagged/cryptocurrency?source=post)
* [Stable Coin](https://hackernoon.com/tagged/stable-coin?source=post)
* [Blockchain](https://hackernoon.com/tagged/blockchain?source=post)
* [Fintech](https://hackernoon.com/tagged/fintech?source=post)

### [Neutral](https://hackernoon.com/@neutralproject)

Neutral Dollar is a metastable basket of stablecoins. The result is a digital
dollar which has lower volatility and combines fragmented pools of liquidity
